docs: add local models PR triage blog post (#3411)
huggingface/blog: local-models-pr-triage.md

---
title: "We got local models to triage the OpenClaw repo for FREE!"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/local-models-pr-triage/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: osolmaz
- user: burtenshaw
- user: evalstate
- user: pcuenq
- user: lysandre
---

# We got local models to triage the OpenClaw repo for FREE!

> 

Reviewer: Couple of points on classifiers -- not necessarily for action or caveat, but ;
1) Breaking down an PR/Issue in a way that means the product surface is understood and labelled correctly is hard.
2) Harnesses and small models are convenient as we have them to hand. 
3) Although in our testing we didn't (and I wouldn't yet) -- it would be quite reasonable for a model to conclude a next-step to gather info, use an external classifier. There's infinite optimisation stories we could tell.

Author: Added 2 of the points as footnote and 1 in the paragraph

Author: Addressed. The intro and footnotes now call out that PR/issue routing requires product-surface understanding, that this differs from a traditional classifier, and that an external classifier could still be part of the system.

> These last few days have shown us how important it is to own your AI stack and be able to run models locally, especially if you are building your business on top of AI. In that light, we wanted to share how we use local models like DeepSeek-V4-Flash and Gemma-4-E4B in an agent harness, to run classification tasks. This approach is different from using a model like BERT for classification. A small model in an agent harness like Pi can be used in tandem with structured outputs, to assign labels.

Reviewer: "These last few days" --> I think for future readers who come across this next year we should probably say something that grounds it in time/space (riffing a few ideas here): 

"With the recent unexpected withdrawal of models, it's more important than ever..." 

"Anthropic being forced to remove access to Fable demonstrated that..."

"June 2026 will go down as the moment that people realised that their access to models was a privilege..."

Author: Addressed. The intro now grounds the point in June 2026 and the removal of Anthropic's Fable, rather than using a vague time reference.

> These last few days have shown us how important it is to own your AI stack and be able to run models locally, especially if you are building your business on top of AI. In that light, we wanted to share how we use local models like DeepSeek-V4-Flash and Gemma-4-E4B in an agent harness, to run classification tasks. This approach is different from using a model like BERT for classification. A small model in an agent harness like Pi can be used in tandem with structured outputs, to assign labels.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These last few days have shown us how important it is to own your AI stack and be able to run models locally, especially if you are building your business on top of AI. In that light, we wanted to share how we use local models like DeepSeek-V4-Flash and Gemma-4-E4B in an agent harness, to run coding tasks. 
```

Our starting point was open source contributions in the OpenClaw repo. OpenClaw gets hundreds of issues and PRs every day, which need to be triaged, prioritized and routed to maintainers. I, Onur, am working to make local models work well with OpenClaw. Being a maintainer of this specific vertical, I need to react quickly to any P0 issues.

With SOTA closed models like GPT-5, Opus, or Sonnet, this is a pretty straightforward task. But I happen to sit on 128 GB of unified memory, namely an NVIDIA GB10. So I took on the task:

> Can I build a real-time notification system that filters and notifies me for only the issues that I am responsible for... with local open-weight models?

<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full" style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/local-models-pr-triage/dgx-spark.png" alt="NVIDIA DGX Spark" style="display: block; width: 50%; min-width: 280px; margin: 0 auto;" />
  <figcaption>This tiny box, a.k.a. DGX Spark, can run 3 to 5 Gemma 4 E4B generations at once.</figcaption>
</figure>

> If I set up my OpenClaw main agent running on a $200/mo ChatGPT Pro plan to trigger a job on every new issue or PR, that would use up my quota too quickly. I might instead set it to run every 2 hours, or 6 hours. Since we would be batching a large number of issues, we would be trading real-time notifications for cheaper and lower quality processing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If I set up my OpenClaw main agent running on a $200/mo ChatGPT Pro plan to trigger a job on every new issue or PR, that would use up my quota. I might instead set it to run every 2 hours, or 6 hours. This would batch issues over longer periods, so we would be trading real-time notifications for delayed processing.
```

If I were to run this on a local model on the hardware I already have up and running, I would not only have near-instantaneous notifications, I would also be able to do it for free (or rather, for the cost of electricity).

> How would that work? We show below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

## Categorizing issues and PRs

We came up with a finite set of labels representing the categories of issues we need to triage, and then use a local model to classify each issue into one of those categories, like `local_models`, `self_hosted_inference`, `acp`, `agent_runtime`, `codex`, `ui_tui` and so on.[^1]

> But how to do the classification though? A simple single request to a Chat Completions endpoint with a tool JSON schema, with the topics as an enum?

Reviewer 2: Also mention a traditional classifier here:

```suggestion
But how do we classify pull requests? A simple single request to a Chat Completions endpoint with a tool JSON schema, with the topics as an enum?
```

Kind of. But this is 2026, not 2023, and we have AGENTS. We can do better!

For the local model of choice, use [`gemma-4-E4B-it`](https://huggingface.co/google/gemma-4-E4B-it), because it makes it possible to make at least 3 concurrent requests safely with the hardware we have, giving us a lot of throughput!

We use an agent harness to drive the classification run. For this, we bundle [pi](https://pi.dev) as a harness that can call local model endpoints.

> The agent by default receives the PR title, body and a truncated excerpt of the PR diff in the first prompt. Then, it can choose to use the `bash` tool to perform read-only operations on the OpenClaw repo (in case it needs to look at the codebase), or the `final_json` tool to submit the final classification result.

Reviewer: With E4B have you seen it reliably reach for/use extra info?

Author: I can show at least 1 example :)

But it generally does not reach for it. I believe behavior also depends on the system prompt

<img width="1352" height="870" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4c054e39-04e8-4287-bc54-7eac1a1e527a" />

Reviewer: Cool; personally in articles like this I think including the short anecdote is powerful - "It searched the OpenClaw repository to check ACP behaviour on the PR and assign the correct label based on what it found". type thing.

Author: This is also done with the example

Author: Addressed with a concrete reposhell anecdote. The post now uses a saved Qwen session where repo inspection changed the final labels; E4B is no longer presented as the serious model for this section.

  <figcaption>This is what the final filtered Discord notification looks like: a PR about the desired vertical gets routed to me.</figcaption>
</figure>

This part is very simple and does not involve any LLMs:

1. We use [openclaw/gitcrawl](http://github.com/openclaw/gitcrawl) to act as a local mirror for the repo. Whenever there is a new PR or issue, each item is normalized into the same shape and written into localpager's own SQLite database. If the item is new, localpager creates a classification job for it.
2. A worker then claims jobs from that queue. It builds a GitHub context object containing the issue or PR title, body, labels, author, state, and optionally comments, changed files, and selected diff excerpts. That means the Gemma does not need to browse GitHub or open the URL itself most of the time. It is handed all the relevant context.
3. The context object is rendered into a prompt and passed to `localpager-agent` as described in the previous section. The agent can think and use reposhell, but must eventually output a classification result in the defined schema.

> 4. The output is stored back in localpager SQLite database, and relayed to Discord based on the notification policy configured by the user (i.e. notify me for these topics, but not these other ones).

Reviewer: From earlier in the article:

> But this is 2026, not 2023, and we have AGENTS. We can do better!

It might be worth highlighting more why this pipeline isn't essentially doing "A simple single request to a Chat Completions endpoint with a tool JSON schema, with the topics as an enum?" but with the addition of the bash tool loop. If we have examples where the loop "fixed" something that would be cool.

Author: Addressed. The post now explains reposhell and includes a concrete example where the agent inspected OpenClaw files and corrected the labels, which is the distinction from a single enum-classification request.

Below is a figure showing the overall architecture of localpager:

<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full" style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="assets/local-models-pr-triage/localpager-architecture.svg" alt="Localpager architecture" style="display: block; width: 70%; min-width: 300px; margin: 0 auto;" />
</figure>

> The architecture is semi-agentic. Labeling is done agentically, while sending a notification is handled by deterministic rules. This is to make the notification pipeline faster by removing the need for inference for the most straightforward parts of the task. Local inference is free but each task has a resource contention cost: GPU bandwidth should be reserved for tasks where inference is absolutely needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The architecture is semi-agentic. Labeling is done agentically, while sending a notification is handled by deterministic rules. This is to make the notification pipeline faster by removing the need for inference for the most straightforward parts of the task. Local inference is free but each task has a resource contention cost: GPU bandwidth should be reserved for tasks where inference is absolutely needed. This also reduces chance of errors from notifcation.
```

> Separating it this way also reduces the rate of error: the model would otherwise have two chances to make an error, `classify + notify`. Now it has only one: `classify`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

> ## Making small models not classify horribly

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Can small models triage PRs?```

Let's be frank: `gemma-4-e4b-it` was designed to run on limited hardware, and by default it has a tendency to put too many unrelated labels on a PR or issue. But being small, it can run 10-15x faster than a larger model like [DeepSeek-V4-Flash](https://huggingface.co/antirez/deepseek-v4-gguf) locally and with 4x less memory, which lets us run 3 of them concurrently. For such triage tasks, we can use the larger DeepSeek-V4-Flash model (I will refer to it as DS4) as the teacher: create a dataset of reference labels, and then iterate on the prompt for Gemma to maximize accuracy over the teacher-generated dataset.

We selected over 700 PRs and issues, and came up with a set of 40 labels using Codex. We then constructed a prompt that gives context on what each label means, and did an independent DS4 with `localpager` on each PR/issue to generate the reference labels.

> The results are saved in [openclaw-classification-dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/dutifuldev/openclaw-classification-dataset). The iteration process did not follow an automated approach like GEPA, and was done in an interactive Codex session semi-manually. Despite that, we were able to get rid of 20% of the false positives and 15% of the false negatives, mostly with the labels that we were concerned about, e.g. `local_models`. We were able to do that without making the prompt any more complex or longer, like adding a new rule for each case where it failed.

Reviewer 2: I would add a figure with the accuracy results here.

Author: Addressed. The post now includes a benchmark figure with Precision/Recall, parameters, concurrency, and throughput, plus error bars for the repeated Gemma/Qwen runs.

For example, [`PR #72404 fix(models): default input=[text,image] for vision-capable explicit-only models`](http://github.com/openclaw/openclaw/pull/72404) was originally labeled by DS4 as `[config]`, but the same prompt with Gemma 4 had given `[local_model_providers, reliability]`. After optimizing the prompt, however, Gemma 4 also gives `[config]` as the correct label.

In another case, [`PR #84549 fix(deepinfra): load all DeepInfra models when user wants to browse...`](http://github.com/openclaw/openclaw/pull/84549) shows that the "correct" label can still be a bit subjective. DS4 labeled it as `[model_serving]`, while the optimized Gemma prompt gave `[model_releases, chat_integrations]`. This assignment is not exactly right, but it is not exactly wrong either.

> You can see the original prompt for DS4 and the optimized Gemma prompt [here](https://huggingface.co/datasets/dutifuldev/openclaw-classification-dataset/blob/main/prompts/README.md). We went through multiple iterations, and ended up reducing the number of false positives and false negatives. For this notification system, false positives were more important to get rid of for us, because they waste one's attention and time when an issue is labeled incorrectly. For that reason, we were biased towards reducing false positives more than false negatives.

Reviewer: I think there's at least one model too many in this picture; why not just use DS4-Flash. If GPT-5.5 is being used as a judge why run twice. If the reason is a cascade of accuracy, I don't see why E4B > DS4 if you can run both locally?

Author: The reason is throughput, I think I should make it clearer. DS4 is super slow

Author: Addressed. The model section now explains why DeepSeek-V4-Flash was not used as the main localpager-agent model: it was inconsistent across runs and too slow for the real-time/high-throughput setup on this hardware.

## Tracking and validating real time performance using OpenClaw

> We have mentioned earlier that instead of running a job with a local model for every new issue or PR, we can run a batch job with a SOTA cloud model, like GPT-5.5 running in OpenClaw, every n hours (e.g. every 2 hours) to achieve the same end.

Reviewer: Using LLM as a judge negates the "Free" aspects a bit (as we are now at local generation + judge generation + diff reporting...); but this seems interesting to add to the architecture diagram as a feedback loop?

I think an interesting aspect here is how many tokens does GPT-5.5 take to do it -- because when you don't need that, it's a direct saving. So without having to promise anything further the "Goal" can be to further improve accuracy.

Author: Just added a footnote for it

>   - notifier interest: i1; topics: config, api_surface, local_model_providers; notification: sent
> - PR #88247 feat: add hosted model providers
>   - notifier interest: i0; topics: local_model_providers, model_serving, docs, api_surface; notification: sent

The instructions on how to classify, edit the machine-readable file, get the false positives and false negatives using a script are present in an [agent skill](https://github.com/osolmaz/onurclaw/blob/main/.agents/skills/openclaw-onur-inventory/SKILL.md) which is referenced in an [OpenClaw cron job](https://docs.openclaw.ai/automation/cron-jobs) that runs every 2 hours. The OpenClaw agent then ingests any new issues or PRs, adds them to the JSON file with appropriate labels, runs the scripts and reports back in the same Discord channel. This way, we can observe the local model's performance every few hours, and get notified of the misses.

## Conclusion

We think that the issue/PR triage task is a specific case of a broader set of tasks which we call "high throughput triage". This post explored the idea of using a local model to filter out information in real time in only one domain, that is, open source contributions.

> However, the same approach can be applied to other domains as well:

Reviewer: I think this comes back to the "why not use a classifier"? I think it might be simpler to focus on the token cost / performance/ sovereignty aspects than overplay the agentic aspect?

Author: I believe I addressed this both in the intro and conclusion now

> The ability of medium-sized local models like `gemma-4-26b-a4b` and `qwen3.6-35b-a3b` to one-shot classify with good accuracy without any need for fine-tuning makes them a good first choice for quick prototyping, before one moves on to more cost-efficient traditional classifier models.

## Conclusion

We think that the issue/PR triage task is a specific case of a broader set of tasks which we call "high throughput triage". This post explored the idea of using a local model to filter out information in real time in only one domain, that is, open source contributions.

However, the same approach can be applied to other domains as well:

- News categorization in journalism
- Filtering for posts of interest in social media and forums like X or Reddit
- Triaging customer support tickets
- Triaging content moderation appeals
- Filtering potential outreach while doing sales
- Filtering for certain topics on arXiv while doing research

The list can be extended, but we think that the idea should be clear.

Besides triaging, we have also explored how classification can be performed with agent harnesses running fast local models in a secure manner. We called this approach *agentic classification*: the model is not fed the entire body of information upfront, but can search for more context before returning structured data.

> [^1]: For the use case in this post, we have discovered that breaking down a PR/Issue in a way that means the product surface is understood and labelled correctly is a hard problem.

Reviewer: [^1]: Correctly routing PRs and Issues requires the model to reason through and understand the product surface and nuances to avoid over-labelling. Straightforward keyword identification is often misleading.
```suggestion
[^1]: For the use case in this post, we have discovered that breaking down a PR/Issue in a way that means the product surface is understood and labelled correctly is a hard problem.
```

Author: Addressed. The footnote now uses the suggested framing that breaking down a PR/issue so the product surface is understood and labeled correctly is a hard problem.

4. The output is stored back in localpager SQLite database, and relayed to Discord based on the notification policy configured by the user (i.e. notify me for these topics, but not these other ones).

Below is a figure showing the overall architecture of localpager:

<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full" style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="assets/local-models-pr-triage/localpager-architecture.svg" alt="Localpager architecture" style="display: block; width: 70%; min-width: 300px; margin: 0 auto;" />
</figure>

The architecture is semi-agentic. Labeling is done agentically, while sending a notification is handled by deterministic rules. This is to make the notification pipeline faster by removing the need for inference for the most straightforward parts of the task. Local inference is free but each task has a resource contention cost: GPU bandwidth should be reserved for tasks where inference is absolutely needed. This also reduces chance of errors from notifcation.

## Can local models triage PRs?

> Let's be frank: the first local versions of this system were noisy. `gemma-4-e4b-it` was useful for getting the end-to-end local pipeline working, but it also had a tendency to put too many unrelated labels on a PR or issue. That pushed us toward testing larger local models, including `gemma-4-26b-a4b` and `qwen3.6-35b-a3b`, on the 330-row evaluation set below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's be frank: the first local versions of this system were noisy. The first model tested - `gemma-4-e4b-it` was useful for getting the end-to-end local pipeline working, but it also had a tendency to put too many unrelated labels on a PR or issue. False positive labels make the Discord feed noisy and don't focus my attention on the right issues. That pushed us toward testing larger local models, including `gemma-4-26b-a4b` and `qwen3.6-35b-a3b`, on the 330-row evaluation set below.
```

Think it's worth anecdoting why false +ves devalue the utility.

We did not need to do prompt optimization for `gemma-4-26b-a4b` or `qwen3.6-35b-a3b` before getting useful results on this evaluation set. Using the same routing prompt, Gemma had higher recall and lower wall-clock time per row, while Qwen had higher precision, higher exact match, and fewer false positives. We also ran `DeepSeek-V4-Flash` on the same set as a reference. It had the fewest false positives, but the model size and throughput make it impractical for executing these tasks in real time on the NVIDIA GB10. Since each row can have multiple labels, false positives and false negatives are total label counts across all rows. The Qwen result below is after retrying structured-output failures where the model ran out of output tokens before calling `final_json`.

> | Metric | `gemma-4-26b-a4b` | `qwen3.6-35b-a3b` | `DeepSeek-V4-Flash` |

Reviewer: i'd add gpt-5.4-mini in here for comparison...

by the way my best 3.6-35b-a3b was https://huggingface.co/buckets/evalstate/openclaw-data/tree/7i-qwen36-a3b-rendered-prompt.md

Author: Shall we do it in a future iteration? I might need 1 more day to do that

## Can local models triage PRs?

Let's be frank: the first local versions of this system were noisy. `gemma-4-e4b-it` was useful for getting the end-to-end local pipeline working, but it also had a tendency to put too many unrelated labels on a PR or issue. That pushed us toward testing larger local models, including `gemma-4-26b-a4b` and `qwen3.6-35b-a3b`, on the 330-row evaluation set below.

For early prompt work, we also used `DeepSeek-V4-Flash` through the antirez DS4 implementation[^4] to create the earlier dataset labels. That setup used the DS4 server over CUDA. We eventually gave up on DS4 as the labeler because it was not labeling consistently across runs. We also did not consider it as the main `localpager-agent` model because it was too big to get enough throughput on our hardware: the DS4 server gave us around 14 tokens per second, with maximum concurrency of 1.

> For evaluation, we used the 330-row `evalstate-openclaw-git-labels` set from our [OpenClaw classification dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/dutifuldev/openclaw-classification-dataset). We generated it programmatically from real OpenClaw issues and PRs: each row had five teacher passes behind it, three GPT teacher runs and two Opus teacher runs, and the pipeline kept rows whose modal labels were stable enough under its quality gates. We use those labels as a fixed comparison target for local model runs while still treating ambiguous cases as genuinely subjective.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To test model performance, we selected and generated labels for 330 GitHub issues. Each issue was labelled five times (3x GPT-5.5 and 2x Opus 4.8) with the models needing to be in agreement to be accepted. This process involved hand adjudicating, improving label definitions and highlighting internal product design choices for the models. This gave us a set of stable, reproducable labels to compare our smaller models against. 
```

> We did not need to do prompt optimization for `gemma-4-26b-a4b` or `qwen3.6-35b-a3b` before getting useful results on this evaluation set. Using the same routing prompt, Gemma had higher recall and lower wall-clock time per row, while Qwen had higher precision, higher exact match, and fewer false positives. We also ran `DeepSeek-V4-Flash` on the same set as a reference. It had the fewest false positives, but the model size and throughput make it impractical for executing these tasks in real time on the NVIDIA GB10. Since each row can have multiple labels, false positives and false negatives are total label counts across all rows. The Qwen result below is after retrying structured-output failures where the model ran out of output tokens before calling `final_json`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We distilled and tweaked the labelling prompt for `gemma-4-26b-a4b` and `qwen3.6-35b-a3b` which provided a good baseline. Using the same routing prompt, Gemma had higher recall and lower wall-clock time per row, while Qwen had higher precision, higher exact match, and fewer false positives. We also ran `DeepSeek-V4-Flash` on the same set as a reference. It had the fewest false positives, but the model size and throughput make it impractical for executing these tasks in real time on the NVIDIA GB10. Since each row can have multiple labels, false positives and false negatives are total label counts across all rows. The Qwen result below is after retrying structured-output failures where the model ran out of output tokens before calling `final_json`.
```

Author: I actually used the same prompt that came with the dataset? Am I missing something?

> | Metric | `gemma-4-26b-a4b` | `qwen3.6-35b-a3b` | `DeepSeek-V4-Flash` |

Reviewer: I'd also run this _n_ times to demonstrate that we're not just picking a "lucky run".

Author: Addressed. We now use the original run plus two repeat runs for Gemma and Qwen, report mean ± sample standard deviation in the table, and show error bars for Precision/Recall in the figure. I avoided calling these confidence intervals because n=3 is too small for that claim; the post frames them as repeatability stats instead.

## Conclusion

We think that the issue/PR triage task is a specific case of a broader set of tasks which we call "high throughput triage". This post explored the idea of using a local model to filter out information in real time in only one domain, that is, open source contributions.

However, the same approach can be applied to other domains as well:

- News categorization in journalism
- Filtering for posts of interest in social media and forums like X or Reddit
- Triaging customer support tickets
- Triaging content moderation appeals
- Filtering potential outreach while doing sales
- Filtering for certain topics on arXiv while doing research

The list can be extended, but we think that the idea should be clear.

> Besides triaging, we have also explored how classification can be performed with agent harnesses running fast local models in a secure manner. We called this approach *agentic classification*: the model is not fed the entire body of information upfront, but can search for more context before returning structured data.

Reviewer: Just a comment here -- it sounds like we are presenting this as a novel approach and I'm not sure it meets that threshold?

Author: Rephrased to be less imposing

---
title: "We got local models to triage the OpenClaw repo for FREE!*"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/local-models-pr-triage/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: osolmaz
- user: burtenshaw
- user: evalstate
- user: pcuenq
- user: lysandre
---

# We got local models to triage the OpenClaw repo for FREE!*

> *\*Free as in beer, excluding the cost of electricity, and assuming you already own an Nvidia GB10*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*\*Free as in beer, excluding the cost of electricity, and assuming you already own the hardware*
```

Author: Done
